.. _first_steps:

===========
First Steps
===========

The package installs a variety of functions and procedures under the *UTILS*
schema by default. The functions are divided into modules and each module
defines at least two roles which can be used to grant access to the functions
of that module. The roles are always named **UTILS_module_USER** and
**UTILS_module_ADMIN**. For example, the `auth.sql`_ defines
**UTILS_AUTH_USER** and **UTILS_AUTH_ADMIN**. The **UTILS_AUTH_USER** role has
the ability to execute all procedures and functions within the module. The
**UTILS_AUTH_ADMIN** role also has these execute privileges and in addition has
the ability to grant the **UTILS_AUTH_USER** role to other users and roles.

In addition to the per-module roles, there are also a couple of other roles:
**UTILS_USER** and **UTILS_ADMIN**. **UTILS_USER** holds all the per-module
user roles, while **UTILS_ADMIN** holds all the per-module administrative roles
so if you wish to grant access to the entire suite, simply grant one of these
two roles.  Naturally, **UTILS_ADMIN** also holds the ability to grant
**UTILS_USER**, and in addition has **CREATEIN**, **DROPIN**, and **ALTERIN**
privileges on the target schema.

Hence, after installing the package your first step will likely be to assign
some roles to other roles. For example, let's assume you have a role called
**DEVELOPERS** who should have access to the entire suite of functions in
db2utils.  Let's also assume there's a role for ordinary users called
**QUERY_USERS** who should only have access to the enhanced date-time functions
in the `date_time.sql`_ module. Finally, there's a role for administrative
users called **ADMINS** who should have administrative control over the
package. In this case, after installation you would do the following::

    $ db2 GRANT ROLE UTILS_ADMIN TO ROLE ADMINS WITH ADMIN OPTION
    $ db2 GRANT ROLE UTILS_USER TO ROLE DEVELOPERS
    $ db2 GRANT ROLE UTILS_DATE_TIME_USER TO ROLE QUERY_USERS

In order to provide easier access to the functions and procedures in the
package you will likely want to alter your function search path::

    $ db2 SET PATH SYSTEM PATH, USER, UTILS

If you use the utilities regularly you may wish to construct a small script,
alias, or function for connecting to your database and setting the function
search path automatically. For example, in my *.bashrc* I have::

    sample() {
        # Ensure the correct instance is active
        db2 TERMINATE
        source ~db2inst1/sqllib/db2profile
        # Connect to the database and set up the environment
        db2 CONNECT TO SAMPLE
        db2 SET PATH SYSTEM PATH, USER, UTILS
        db2 SET SCHEMA MAIN
    }


.. _auth.sql: https://github.com/waveform-computing/db2utils/blob/master/auth.sql
.. _date_time.sql: https://github.com/waveform-computing/db2utils/blob/master/date_time.sql
